finalProject.cpp User Manual

While many of the instructions for using finalProject.cpp are given to the user as he runs the program, the following is a guide to the nuances. Operation should be simple, but you may find this manual helpful. To provide a brief overview, finalProject.cpp provides the user three different encryption tools to encode or decode a message. The tools themselves are three different types of encryption. The user will have the option to encrypt or decrypt their message using either file input or input from the keyboard. Additionally, many of the options will write the output to a .txt file. These output files are formatted so that they themselves can be used as input for the program. It is important to remember that all the menus look similar, so make sure to read the title of the menu to be sure you are in the correct program. Also, each selection has it’s own special rules, particularly for the input of encryption keys and key words, so be sure to read the instructions as they are given to you.

The Main Menu
The program begins with a prompt for the user to select a cipher. You may choose  one of the following options:
1. Caesar Cipher
	Shifts letters of your message a set number to the right. The number of shifts is provided by an 	encryption key.
2. Playfair Cipher
	Organizes letters into a 5X5 box with the box being filled with the unused letters of the   	alphabet. The messages letters are divided into  groups of two and shifted based on a their r   	relative positions within the box.
3. Columnar Transposition Cipher
	Creates a box that is the width of a keyword which is placed in the top row. The message then  	populates the rest of the box. The top row (keyword) is then sorted alphabetically, transposing 	the entire column with it.
4. Quit
	Exit the program.

The Caesar Cipher
	Selecting option 1 brings you to the Caesar Cipher menu and provides its own list of options. 
1. Encode message using keyboard input
    •             Upon choosing option 1, the user will be prompted to enter a file name. The plain text and key that the user provides will be formatted and stored in this fill and can be used later to encode a message. Type in the desired file name followed by .txt to make it a text  file and press “enter”
    • 	The user will then be prompted to enter another filename. This file will contain the message coded from the users input. Follow the same steps to enter the file name. Be sure to give your second file a different name.
    • 	After naming your output files, enter an encryption key. This can be any number between 1 and 25. This number is used to encrypt and decrypt the message. Any number entered over 25 can cause encoding errors.
    • 	Once you choose an encryption key, you will be prompted to enter your message. Do not worry about capitalization or spacing, the program processes the message to all caps and removes spaces. Do not add any punctuation.
		
    •           Your encoded message will display along with an option to enter another message. If you wish to enter another message, enter ‘y’ and you will be returned to the encryption key prompt. Note that you were not asked to enter new file names. That is because the files you 	created will be appended with the new output you provide it. If you use to encode or decode 	these files later, the appended messages will be decoded as well, using their own encryption keys. 
    •           Once you have entered your second message you will be prompted to ask if you want to add another message again. This time selecting ‘y’ returns the message, “Maximum number of messages entered” because the limit is two. From there you are returned to the Caesar Cipher menu.
2.	Encode message using file input
    •           You will be prompted to enter a filename. Be careful to type in a filename that contains the plain text message formatted for the Caesar Cipher. Decoded and plain text files generated by the Caesar 	Cipher are valid options. Be sure to include .txt at the end of your filename.
    • 	The file’s input will display on screen as well as the decrypted message below it. If the 	message selected was an appended file with two messages the second message will display 	below the first. You will be returned to the Caesar Cipher menu.
3.	Decode message using keyboard inputting
    • See option 1, directions are identical. Be sure to use your Caesar Encoded message with 	the correct key and not a plain text message. 
4.	Decode message using file input
    •           You will be prompted to enter a filename. Be careful to type in a filename that contains the formatted message encoded with the Caesar Cipher. Encoded files generated by the Caesar Cipher are valid options. Be sure to include .txt at the end of your filename.
    • 	The file’s input will display on screen as well as the decrypted message below it. If the message selected was an appended file with two messages the second message will display below the first. You will be returned to the Caesar Cipher menu.
5.	Return to main menu.
    •           If you are finished using the Caesar Cipher you can return to the main menu to use another cipher or exit the program.

The Playfair Cipher
Select one of the Playfair Cipher Menu options
1.	Encode message using keyboard input
    •  	Upon choosing option 1, the user will be prompted to enter a file name. The plain text and key that the user provides will be formatted and stored in this fill and can be used later to encode a message. Type in the desired file name followed by .txt to make it a text  file and press “enter”.       
    •           The user will then be prompted to enter another filename. This file will contain the message coded from the users input. Follow the same steps to enter the file name. Be sure to give your second file a different name.
    •           Next you will be prompted to enter a keyword. Make sure the keyword is under 25 characters long and contains no repeated characters or errors will be produced.
    •           Next, enter the message. The program will display the results and write them to their respective files that can be used later be the program.
2.	Encode using file input
    •           You will be prompted to enter a filename. Be careful to type in a filename that contains the plain text message formatted for the Playfair Cipher. Decoded and plain text files generated by the Playfair Cipher are valid options. Be sure to include .txt at the end of your filename.

    •            Next you will be prompted to enter the name of a file. This file will contain the output generated from encoding the message and will be formatted for later use by the Playfair Cipher. Be sure to add .txt at the end of your file name. 
    •          The keyword, message, and encoded message will display on screen. The file you named containing the encoded message was also created. 
3.          Decode message using keyboard inputting
    • See option 1 for Playfair Cipher, instructions are the same. Files and output will be decoded instead of encoded so be sure to enter coded text and the appropriate key word.
4.	Decode message using file input
    •  	You will be prompted to enter a filename. Be careful to type in a filename that contains the message formatted and encoded for Playfair Cipher. Encoded files generated by the Playfair Cipher are valid options. Be sure to include .txt at the end of your filename.
    •              Next you will be prompted to enter the name of a file. This file will contain the output generated from encoding the message and will be formatted for later use by the Playfair Cipher. Be sure to add .txt at the end of your file name. 
    •   The keyword, message, and encoded message will display on screen. The file you named containing the encoded message was also created. 
5.	Return to main menu
    • If you are finished using the Caesar Cipher you can return to the main menu to use another cipher or exit the program.

